apt-cacher-ng.md, before:

# Using apt-cacher-ng as a caching proxy in Qubes.

## Why?
The standard tinyproxy is just a proxy. This ,means that as soon as you start to use more than a few templates you are wasting bandwidth (and time) in repeatedly downloading the same packages.  
Using a caching proxy saves on both.

## How?
apt-cacher-ng is a caching proxy with support for Debian based distros out of the box, as well as Arch.
It can be configured to support Fedora, Suse, Gentoo, and \*BSD

###  INSTALL 
Create a new Debian based template -  
`qvm-clone debian-11-minimal template-cacher`

In template-cacher install the software, by running as root:  
```
apt-get install qubes-core-agent-networking apt-cacher-ng 
systemctl mask apt-cacher-ng 
```
Shut down template-cacher.

### Create and configure the proxy

Create a qube and give it plenty of space on the private volume:
```
qvm-create cacher -t template-cacher -l red 
qvm-volume resize cacher:private 40G
```

Start the proxy, and configure bind-dirs to store significant material on the private volume:  
Create a file at /rw/config/qubes-bind-dirs.d/50_user.conf:
```
binds+=( '/var/cache/apt-cacher-ng' )
binds+=( '/var/log/apt-cacher-ng' )
binds+=( '/etc/apt-cacher-ng' )
```

Use /rw/config/rc.local to start the apt-cacher-ng service.  
Add these lines:  
```
systemctl unmask apt-cacher-ng
systemctl start apt-cacher-ng
/sbin/iptables -I INPUT -p tcp --dport 8082 -j ACCEPT
```

Restart cacher.

In /etc/apt-cacher-ng/acng.conf:
edit the `Port:` line to say `Port:8082`

Restart service:  
`systemctl restart apt-cacher-ng`


### Using the proxy
You can use the proxy simply by editing the qrexec policy.
Create a new policy in dom0 /etc/qubes/policy.d/30-user.policy:  
`qubes.UpdatesProxy * @type:TemplateVM  @default  allow target=cacher`

Now all templates will attempt to use the caching proxy instead of the default proxy running on sys-net.


### Configuring templates.
Some templates use HTTPS links to repositories. These need special treatment.
Otherwise the traffic will be encrypted when it reaches the proxy so the proxy will not know what to do.  
It is possible to "pass through" HTTPS traffic by editing the config file at /etc/apt-cacher-ng/acng.conf. 
You create a regex which will match the server(s) you want to pass through:
`PassThroughPattern: debian.org:443$`  
This will pass though traffic to https://debian.org.
If you do this you will *not* cache that traffic.

If you *do* want to cache this traffic then you have to rewrite the repository definition.
The simplest way to do this is to change the repository definition FROM:
https://yum.qubes-os.org/
TO:
http://HTTPS///yum.qubes-os.org/

This will use HTTP to the proxy - the proxy will use TLS to pick up the packages and
cache any responses.  
This is the recommended approach.

You can make this change in the template by running:  
`sed -i s^https://^http://HTTPS///^ REPO_DEFINITION`  - e.g:  
`sed -i s^https://^http://HTTPS///^ /etc/apt/sources.list`

You must make the change in *every defined repository that you want to use*. If you do not then you will see an error message:
```
Failed to fetch ....
Invalid response from proxy: HTTP/1.0 403 CONNECT denied (ask the admin to allow HTTPS tunnels)
```


## Other configuration.

### Grouping repositories
apt-cacher-ng has a mechanism for mapping calls to different repositories on to the same cache.
This is called `mapping` and is described in the excellent [manual](https://www.unix-ag.uni-kl.de/~bloch/acng/html/index.html).
There are some predefined mapping lists that you can use.  
If you check the caches at `/var/cache/apt-cacher-ng` you may see that there are entries for individual repositories. You can edit the mapping files to include them.
For example, you may set up mapping Fedora repositories by including this line in the config file:
`Remap-fedora: file:fedora_mirrors` where "fedora_mirrors" is a file containing a list of fedora repositories or URLs.  
After a while you notice that the cached directories in `/var/cache/apt-cacher-ng` include "fedora" with many cached packages, but also "mirror.telepoint.bg".
This is a fedora mirror.
You simply edit the "fedora_mirrors" file to include the name "mirror.telepoint.bg".
Now requests to that mirror will be dealt with in the main cache directory.

Ideally you want **all** the packages downloaded from **any** Debian repository to be served from the same cache.

### Fedora
Fedora templates need some special treatment, because the default repository definitions use metalinks.
You can either change this to use a BASEURL definition, or to make the metalinks return HTTP repos instead of HTTPS links.

You can do this by changing (e.g) `metalink= https://......basearch` to `metalink=http://HTTPS///.....basearch&protocol=http`. This will make the metalink only return http repositories.

There is a mirrors list in /usr/lib/apt-cacher-ng/ .
Copy fedora_mirrors to /etc/apt-cacher-ng

Edit /etc/apt-cacher-ng/acng.conf, to use the mapped data:  
`Remap-fedora: file:fedora_mirrors`

If requests fail because the file type is not allowed, create a pattern for
volatile data:
`VfilePatternEx: .*metalink?repo=fedora*`

All this is covered in the manual.


### Troubleshooting

As well as using "pass-through" to handle some repositories, you can exclude templates from using the proxy by setting a policy line *before* the one that points to cacher in /etc/qubes/policy/30-user.policy.
The new line should point named templates to the default system proxy, like this:
```
qubes.UpdatesProxy * fedora-36         @default  allow target=sys-net
qubes.UpdatesProxy * @type:TemplateVM  @default  allow target=cacher
```

Access logs are available on cacher at `/var/log/apt-cacher-ng`.

You can see the cached data in /var/cache/apt-cacher-ng.

There is also a dashboard available on the caching proxy at http://localhost:8082, which contains useful information about how much data is cached and how often used, as well as tools to help control the cached data.

Read the [manual](https://www.unix-ag.uni-kl.de/~bloch/acng/html/index.html).


### Updates over Tor or VPN
Set the netvm for the cacher qube to a Tor or VPN proxy.


### Other qubes
You can also use the proxy with other qubes, besides templates.  
Because the proxy is listening on port 8082, and you have configured iptables to allow inbound traffic to that port, you can use the proxy from any downstream qube, simply by configuring use of the Proxy in that qube, following whatever is the normal method.
(You will have to adjust repository definitions to handle HTTPS.)  
This allows you to have the benefit of caching in normal qubes, and Standalones, without using qrexec.


# The simple way:
Follow the instructions at https://qubes.3isec.org/tasks.html to install qubes-task.  
Select the cacher package and install it.  
The caching proxy will be created, and configured.
All existing templates will be configured to use the proxy.

Commit message:

updated the APT-cacher-ng.md for adding dom0 update proxy section under the "Install"
Added the "If want to be DOM0 update proxy" for anyone want the cacher to be the dom0 update proxy.

apt-cacher-ng.md, after:

# Using apt-cacher-ng as a caching proxy in Qubes.

## Why?
The standard tinyproxy is just a proxy. This ,means that as soon as you start to use more than a few templates you are wasting bandwidth (and time) in repeatedly downloading the same packages.  
Using a caching proxy saves on both.

## How?
apt-cacher-ng is a caching proxy with support for Debian based distros out of the box, as well as Arch.
It can be configured to support Fedora, Suse, Gentoo, and \*BSD

###  INSTALL 
Create a new Debian based template -  
`qvm-clone debian-11-minimal template-cacher`

In template-cacher install the software, by running as root:  
```
apt-get install qubes-core-agent-networking apt-cacher-ng 
systemctl mask apt-cacher-ng 
```
Shut down template-cacher.

#### If want to be the DOM0 update proxy
Open the template-cacher terminal - 
`qvm-run template-cacher terminal`

In template-cacher install the qubes-dom0-update package, running as root:
```
apt-get install qubes-core-agent-dom0-updates
```
Shutdown template-cacher.

### Create and configure the proxy

Create a qube and give it plenty of space on the private volume:
```
qvm-create cacher -t template-cacher -l red 
qvm-volume resize cacher:private 40G
```

Start the proxy, and configure bind-dirs to store significant material on the private volume:  
Create a file at /rw/config/qubes-bind-dirs.d/50_user.conf:
```
binds+=( '/var/cache/apt-cacher-ng' )
binds+=( '/var/log/apt-cacher-ng' )
binds+=( '/etc/apt-cacher-ng' )
```

Use /rw/config/rc.local to start the apt-cacher-ng service.  
Add these lines:  
```
systemctl unmask apt-cacher-ng
systemctl start apt-cacher-ng
/sbin/iptables -I INPUT -p tcp --dport 8082 -j ACCEPT
```

Restart cacher.

In /etc/apt-cacher-ng/acng.conf:
edit the `Port:` line to say `Port:8082`

Restart service:  
`systemctl restart apt-cacher-ng`


### Using the proxy
You can use the proxy simply by editing the qrexec policy.
Create a new policy in dom0 /etc/qubes/policy.d/30-user.policy:  
`qubes.UpdatesProxy * @type:TemplateVM  @default  allow target=cacher`

Now all templates will attempt to use the caching proxy instead of the default proxy running on sys-net.


### Configuring templates.
Some templates use HTTPS links to repositories. These need special treatment.
Otherwise the traffic will be encrypted when it reaches the proxy so the proxy will not know what to do.  
It is possible to "pass through" HTTPS traffic by editing the config file at /etc/apt-cacher-ng/acng.conf. 
You create a regex which will match the server(s) you want to pass through:
`PassThroughPattern: debian.org:443$`  
This will pass though traffic to https://debian.org.
If you do this you will *not* cache that traffic.

If you *do* want to cache this traffic then you have to rewrite the repository definition.
The simplest way to do this is to change the repository definition FROM:
https://yum.qubes-os.org/
TO:
http://HTTPS///yum.qubes-os.org/

This will use HTTP to the proxy - the proxy will use TLS to pick up the packages and
cache any responses.  
This is the recommended approach.

You can make this change in the template by running:  
`sed -i s^https://^http://HTTPS///^ REPO_DEFINITION`  - e.g:  
`sed -i s^https://^http://HTTPS///^ /etc/apt/sources.list`

You must make the change in *every defined repository that you want to use*. If you do not then you will see an error message:
```
Failed to fetch ....
Invalid response from proxy: HTTP/1.0 403 CONNECT denied (ask the admin to allow HTTPS tunnels)
```


## Other configuration.

### Grouping repositories
apt-cacher-ng has a mechanism for mapping calls to different repositories on to the same cache.
This is called `mapping` and is described in the excellent [manual](https://www.unix-ag.uni-kl.de/~bloch/acng/html/index.html).
There are some predefined mapping lists that you can use.  
If you check the caches at `/var/cache/apt-cacher-ng` you may see that there are entries for individual repositories. You can edit the mapping files to include them.
For example, you may set up mapping Fedora repositories by including this line in the config file:
`Remap-fedora: file:fedora_mirrors` where "fedora_mirrors" is a file containing a list of fedora repositories or URLs.  
After a while you notice that the cached directories in `/var/cache/apt-cacher-ng` include "fedora" with many cached packages, but also "mirror.telepoint.bg".
This is a fedora mirror.
You simply edit the "fedora_mirrors" file to include the name "mirror.telepoint.bg".
Now requests to that mirror will be dealt with in the main cache directory.

Ideally you want **all** the packages downloaded from **any** Debian repository to be served from the same cache.

### Fedora
Fedora templates need some special treatment, because the default repository definitions use metalinks.
You can either change this to use a BASEURL definition, or to make the metalinks return HTTP repos instead of HTTPS links.

You can do this by changing (e.g) `metalink= https://......basearch` to `metalink=http://HTTPS///.....basearch&protocol=http`. This will make the metalink only return http repositories.

There is a mirrors list in /usr/lib/apt-cacher-ng/ .
Copy fedora_mirrors to /etc/apt-cacher-ng

Edit /etc/apt-cacher-ng/acng.conf, to use the mapped data:  
`Remap-fedora: file:fedora_mirrors`

If requests fail because the file type is not allowed, create a pattern for
volatile data:
`VfilePatternEx: .*metalink?repo=fedora*`

All this is covered in the manual.


### Troubleshooting

As well as using "pass-through" to handle some repositories, you can exclude templates from using the proxy by setting a policy line *before* the one that points to cacher in /etc/qubes/policy/30-user.policy.
The new line should point named templates to the default system proxy, like this:
```
qubes.UpdatesProxy * fedora-36         @default  allow target=sys-net
qubes.UpdatesProxy * @type:TemplateVM  @default  allow target=cacher
```

Access logs are available on cacher at `/var/log/apt-cacher-ng`.

You can see the cached data in /var/cache/apt-cacher-ng.

There is also a dashboard available on the caching proxy at http://localhost:8082, which contains useful information about how much data is cached and how often used, as well as tools to help control the cached data.

Read the [manual](https://www.unix-ag.uni-kl.de/~bloch/acng/html/index.html).


### Updates over Tor or VPN
Set the netvm for the cacher qube to a Tor or VPN proxy.


### Other qubes
You can also use the proxy with other qubes, besides templates.  
Because the proxy is listening on port 8082, and you have configured iptables to allow inbound traffic to that port, you can use the proxy from any downstream qube, simply by configuring use of the Proxy in that qube, following whatever is the normal method.
(You will have to adjust repository definitions to handle HTTPS.)  
This allows you to have the benefit of caching in normal qubes, and Standalones, without using qrexec.


# The simple way:
Follow the instructions at https://qubes.3isec.org/tasks.html to install qubes-task.  
Select the cacher package and install it.  
The caching proxy will be created, and configured.
All existing templates will be configured to use the proxy.
